[Unknown]: IVM
[Amit Varma]: Why should GST be implemented?
[Amit Varma]: Why are all our politicians so corrupt when not all of them are bad people?
[Amit Varma]: I am Amit Varma and in my weekly podcast The Seen and The Unseen, I take a shot at answering all these questions and many more.
[Amit Varma]: I aim to go beyond the seen and show you the unseen effects of public policy and private action.
[Amit Varma]: I speak to experts on economics, political philosophy, cognitive neuroscience and constitutional
[Amit Varma]: law so that their insights can blow not only my mind, but also yours.
[Amit Varma]: The Seen and the Unseen releases every Monday.
[Amit Varma]: So do check out the archives and follow the show at seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: You can also subscribe to The Seen and the Unseen on whatever podcast app you happen
[Amit Varma]: to prefer.
[Amit Varma]: And now, let's move on to the show.
[Amit Varma]: For a species continuously at war with itself, what does it mean to have nuclear weapons?
[Amit Varma]: Is there going to be more war?
[Amit Varma]: Or because these weapons are so deadly, is there going to be less war?
[Amit Varma]: If no one will mess with someone who has nuclear weapons, does it mean that the smallest country
[Amit Varma]: with a nuclear bomb is automatically at par with the most powerful army in the world?
[Amit Varma]: And what does all this mean in the context of the Indian subcontinent?
[Amit Varma]: Because both India and Pakistan have nuclear weapons, does it make our conflict more dangerous
[Amit Varma]: or less?
[Amit Varma]: Are those weapons ever likely to be used?
[Amit Varma]: Can they be controlled?
[Amit Varma]: What do armies really mean in this nuclear world?
[Amit Varma]: What does war mean?
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My subject for today is war in the nuclear age.
[Amit Varma]: And my guest is Lieutenant General Prakash Menon.
[Amit Varma]: General Menon is the Director of Strategic Studies in the Takshashila Institution in
[Amit Varma]: Bangalore and he served for 40 years in the army before that.
[Amit Varma]: He served as Siachan and at the line of control and he was involved in counterinsurgency in
[Amit Varma]: Jammu and Kashmir.
[Amit Varma]: He has been the Commandant of the National Defense College in Delhi.
[Amit Varma]: And here's what I find most fascinating about him.
[Amit Varma]: He's an Army General who also has a PhD.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, he expanded his PhD thesis into a book that you'll find on Amazon called The
[Amit Varma]: Strategy Trap, India and Pakistan under the Nuclear Shadow.
[Amit Varma]: I had a fascinating conversation with him in Bangalore recently.
[Amit Varma]: But before we get to that, here's a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: If this happens to be the only podcast you listen to, well, you need to listen to some
[Amit Varma]: more.
[Amit Varma]: Check out the ones from IBM Podcast who co-produced the show with me.
[Amit Varma]: Go to ibmpodcast.com or download the IBM app and you'll find a host of great Indian podcasts
[Amit Varma]: that cover every subject you could think of.
[Amit Varma]: From the magazine I edit, Pragati, at thinkpragati.com, there is the Pragati podcast hosted by Hamsini
[Amit Varma]: Hariharan and Pawan Srinath.
[Amit Varma]: There is a brilliant Hindi podcast, Puliyabazi, hosted by Pranay Kutasane and Sourabh Chandra.
[Amit Varma]: And apart from these policy podcasts, IBM has shows that cover music, films, finance,
[Amit Varma]: sports, sci-fi, tech and the LGBT community all under one roof or rather all in one app.
[Amit Varma]: So download the IBM podcast app today.
[Amit Varma]: General Menon, welcome to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: General Menon, one of the most fascinating things about your bio data, which I found,
[Amit Varma]: which is like so impressive, the things that you've done in your 40 years of Army service
[Amit Varma]: is the fact that you're also a PhD.
[Amit Varma]: You've done a doctorate, in fact, in the very subject that you later expanded into this
[Amit Varma]: book, the strategy trap.
[Amit Varma]: Tell us a little bit about how that came about.
[Guest]: Yeah, actually, my PhD is by default, in the sense that it was triggered by a discussion
[Guest]: when I was an instructor in Staff College when India had just gone become a nuclear
[Guest]: power and we have this practice in Staff College where a senior officer who comes to address
[Guest]: the college has a discussion with the what we call directing staff, which is the instructional
[Guest]: staff there.
[Guest]: So there was this discussion and I was part of that discussion.
[Guest]: And during the discussion, the discussion was about now that India has gone nuclear,
[Guest]: what does it mean for the Indian Armed Forces?
[Guest]: During that discussion, I realized that what I instinctively thought about the fact that
[Guest]: we've gone nuclear would make a lot of difference to what the armed forces can do was quite
[Guest]: different from what most of them, in fact, all of them said.
[Guest]: And I was a sole voice who said that now things are going to be profoundly different.
[Guest]: And at one stage, in fact, I was given a shut up call by the commandant because I was arguing
[Guest]: with the senior general of the army who was saying that nothing is going to be I mean,
[Guest]: everything is going to be the same.
[Guest]: And I was saying, no, it's not the case.
[Guest]: So that I think was a trigger, which actually finally led me to my PhD, because I said,
[Guest]: I must find out.
[Guest]: And then I had a long journey.
[Guest]: I could do my PhD because I took two years of study leave.
[Guest]: I located myself in this beautiful place called Bangalore, although I was doing a PhD from
[Guest]: Madras University, because I was doing a project with NIAS, which is funded by the Department
[Guest]: of Atomic Energy.
[Guest]: And it was a project which is congruent to my thesis of what is the impact of nuclear
[Guest]: weapons.
[Guest]: And I traveled and traveled all over India, I met people discussed with them, traveled
[Guest]: to the United States, I went to both the coasts, spoke to people in think tanks, but all their
[Guest]: frame was primarily of the Cold War.
[Guest]: So while there were some commonalities, I found that the Indo-Pak situation, the context
[Guest]: demanded a different look.
[Guest]: So two years passed, study leave was over.
[Guest]: And I had not yet started on my PhD.
[Guest]: My thesis was in my head actually, but I had not yet put it down on paper, I had a lot
[Guest]: of notes.
[Guest]: And then suddenly everything gets over, I completed the project with DAE.
[Guest]: And it was a classified project, it still is.
[Guest]: And then I went off to command a brigade in North Kashmir, I commanded the Haji Pir Brigade.
[Guest]: And soon enough came our Parakram.
[Guest]: And according to my thesis, our Parakram could not happen the way it was being planned.
[Guest]: It was planned for being a big war.
[Guest]: And according to me, such big wars are no longer possible between India and Pakistan.
[Guest]: So my thesis survived.
[Guest]: And actually Parakram because nothing happened.
[Guest]: We finally demobilized.
[Guest]: But I couldn't write my thesis and my professor by which time was telling me that I'm running
[Guest]: out of time, that you have to complete your thesis because they have some certain regulations,
[Guest]: university regulations and so on.
[Guest]: And I was promising him that I'll do it.
[Guest]: But there was no time that you could command a brigade in active operations.
[Guest]: We were also involved heavily in counterinsurgency that I could write my thesis.
[Guest]: So two years passed, but my professor was good enough, who understood the situation,
[Guest]: sort of he managed to play around with the rules of the university and gave me some more
[Guest]: time till I went to my next appointment as the Centre Commandant, where also it was not
[Guest]: possible for me to do.
[Guest]: I ran into, I learned the contonement act instead of looking at my thesis because I
[Guest]: was trying to sort out what I thought was a corrupt officer from the Indian Defence
[Guest]: State Service.
[Guest]: And my time, eight months there passed like that before that.
[Guest]: But I thought I'd sorted that officer out, but nothing happened to my thesis.
[Guest]: And I went on to my next, this thing on a course in Delhi, the National Defence College.
[Guest]: And in the National Defence College, I could do a lot of reading and writing about what
[Guest]: it is, but the thesis took a long time.
[Guest]: So it was, I started writing it there and it took some sort of shape, but it was not
[Guest]: in the shape it could be presented.
[Guest]: And then after one year, of course, I was posted back there.
[Guest]: I did some more work.
[Guest]: Then I was promoted and I was sent to South Kashmir where I was a GOC.
[Guest]: And that's the time when my professor gave me a deadline and he said, if you don't
[Guest]: complete by so and so date, your thesis cannot be accepted by the university.
[Guest]: So as a commanding general of an active counterinsurgency force in Kashmir, I had an early riser, used
[Guest]: to get up very early in the morning, which I normally did.
[Guest]: And I used to spend the time writing my thesis and that's how I completed my thesis in
[Guest]: service.
[Guest]: And it's not the case that I wanted to do a PhD, but I think if not for that original
[Guest]: discussion at the DSSC and my dissent, because all the time was also involved with making
[Guest]: plans, which according to me, cannot possibly be actually see fruition because they were
[Guest]: dangerous and actually will not achieve what we want to achieve.
[Guest]: So he was a guy actually at the operational level in official capacity, making being part
[Guest]: of a process that I didn't believe in.
[Guest]: And therefore my PhD became an antithesis of my official life.
[Amit Varma]: So your thesis was an antithesis to sort of and I mean, I find the whole subject very
[Amit Varma]: fascinating in the sense of, of course, we all know that, you know, when two nuclear
[Amit Varma]: powers face off, there's a concept of nuclear deterrence, and that prevents them going from
[Amit Varma]: war.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, how you use forces sort of changes and is collaborated.
[Amit Varma]: But what you have done is you've located all of that in the context of the subcontinent
[Amit Varma]: and the particular challenges that we face that India is nuclear, Pakistan is nuclear,
[Amit Varma]: China is nuclear.
[Amit Varma]: And your main thrust, if I am not mistaken, and stating it this way, is that the way we
[Amit Varma]: use conventional force has changed so drastically, that it is impossible to use it in anything
[Amit Varma]: but the most limited way.
[Amit Varma]: And this most limited way will then also be relatively ineffective.
[Amit Varma]: And this presents a conundrum for us, for army and military strategists.
[Guest]: Is that a correct summation?
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: In the fact, see, one of the problems with nuclear weapons has done to the armed forces
[Guest]: of all countries is to question their relevance.
[Guest]: That why do you need it anymore?
[Guest]: And that's the question which has been challenged.
[Guest]: Because the problem is there are two parallel paradigms which run.
[Guest]: One is if you are a nuclear power, and if you're being faced with another nuclear power,
[Guest]: the paradigm says that your main aim is war prevention, to prevent war.
[Guest]: Nuclear weapons are meant not for use, but to prevent it.
[Guest]: And that's what Bernard Brody, in the initial phase of the late 40s, first propounded.
[Guest]: That the sole purpose of nuclear weapons is to prevent war.
[Guest]: But in the real world, there is conventional force which is there.
[Guest]: And conventional force believes in the paradigm of achieving what you call decisive victories.
[Guest]: So the real world is that you have this need for preventing big war, but you also have
[Guest]: these conventional forces which all the time are planning to be used for decisive victories.
[Guest]: So the two divergent thoughts, but they run parallel.
[Guest]: And that is what has challenged all the armies of the world ever since nuclear weapons have
[Guest]: come to power in India and the Pakistani armies can be no different.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm going to quote a little bit from your introduction, where you talk about, I'll just
[Amit Varma]: quote this bit, start quote, after the Kargil conflict, three schools of thought emerged
[Amit Varma]: in India.
[Amit Varma]: Some believed that a conventional war with Pakistan is no longer practical because of
[Amit Varma]: the possibility of the war escalating beyond the nuclear threshold.
[Amit Varma]: And that matches Pakistan's official view.
[Amit Varma]: Others are of the view that a war limited in space, time and objectives is possible.
[Amit Varma]: And Kargil was cited in support of the argument, which has also been India's official view.
[Amit Varma]: A third group believes that a full fledged conventional war is possible because Pakistan's
[Amit Varma]: nuclear threats are bluffs that must be called since Pakistan could well be decimated, even
[Amit Varma]: though we could also suffer severe damage, close quote.
[Amit Varma]: Out of these three views, which is closest to what you believe?
[Guest]: The first one, which is that actually the utility of force is now in question, because
[Guest]: if you want to use force and a military actually is an instrument of politics, it's applied
[Guest]: against the adversary to achieve political objectives.
[Guest]: And those political objectives is about finally about getting the enemy to do through force
[Guest]: what you want them to do to change their behavior or to do something which you which you don't
[Guest]: want them to do.
[Guest]: So if that is the case, and in the India-Pakistan situation, I think it's very clear that what
[Guest]: India wants to do, achieve politically is how do you stop Pakistan from using terror
[Guest]: as a policy instrument of the state?
[Guest]: And can that therefore be done by India going to war with Pakistan with conventional forces
[Guest]: with conventional forces?
[Guest]: I, in fact, totally I sort of discount the idea of limited nuclear war, because in my
[Guest]: view, if nuclear weapons are used, then it will be extremely difficult to control the
[Guest]: escalation and therefore I also talk about when Pakistan is talking about tactical nuclear
[Guest]: weapons.
[Guest]: And normally the example given is that Pakistan uses tactical nuclear weapons on us, because
[Guest]: we have penetrated into their, I mean, our armoured spearheads have gone into that country,
[Guest]: and therefore they are in danger and they can use tactical nuclear weapons.
[Guest]: And they expect that India would probably give a proportionate reply, but that's not
[Guest]: what the Indian doctrine says.
[Guest]: Indian doctrine believes that if nuclear weapons are used, and we don't believe in the concept
[Guest]: of tactical nuclear weapons, because no use of nuclear weapons can have a tactical effect.
[Guest]: And that is what classifies weapons as tactical or strategic.
[Guest]: And I quote an example in the book that there's nothing, no weapon is strategic or tactical
[Guest]: by itself.
[Guest]: It is in the effect that it creates that it can be used strategically or it can be used
[Guest]: tactically.
[Guest]: And the example I quote is about somebody shooting the President of the United States
[Guest]: of America.
[Guest]: The effect would be strategic, but that doesn't mean the pistol, which has been used is strategic.
[Guest]: It has been used strategically, for strategic effect, though it is the effect which matters.
[Guest]: So if a nuclear weapon, tactical nuclear weapon, as Pakistan says, is used, the effect will
[Guest]: be strategic, because of the fact that it will be used against us for the first time,
[Guest]: somebody has used it in war for the first time, it will have a worldwide reverberation.
[Guest]: And to expect that the Indians will trust the Pakistanis that if they give a proportionate
[Guest]: response, Pakistan will also now respond again proportionately, would be actually asking
[Guest]: too much during that period of crisis of a leader who would be confronted with this problem
[Guest]: that how do we now minimize damage to ourselves?
[Guest]: If they use tactical nuclear weapons, and we use tactical nuclear weapons, or we don't
[Guest]: have them, or we use them tactically for whatever way that we want to, how do we know that the
[Guest]: Pakistanis will not visit us with whatever they have?
[Guest]: We would suffer greater damage.
[Guest]: So the decision left to the political leader is, does he want to take this risk?
[Guest]: Or would he now like to make sure that he hits them so hard that you minimize damage
[Guest]: to yourself?
[Guest]: So these are issues which can actually never be answered fully, because only a person put
[Guest]: in that situation will have to decide how do you use it.
[Guest]: So the Indian doctrine has some sort of flexibility on how to confront this sort of problem which
[Guest]: we have, that anybody who uses nuclear weapons on us can expect that we will retaliate and
[Guest]: that's a credible threat.
[Guest]: The less credible threat is Pakistan telling us they will use it first.
[Guest]: Because how will they use it first when they know that we can actually retaliate?
[Guest]: And a tactical nuclear weapon has this problem that if they use it in a small measure, then
[Guest]: our nuclear weapons are intact.
[Guest]: And therefore, we have the advantage of actually reply them with much greater response, which
[Guest]: can hurt them more than what they want to achieve.
[Guest]: So you know, these are the dilemmas of use of weapons.
[Guest]: Any use of weapon is actually impractical.
[Guest]: So it cannot be used by a rational action.
[Amit Varma]: This is actually a very profound point and eye opening for me this distinction that you've
[Amit Varma]: made between the tactical use and the strategic use.
[Amit Varma]: And we've often heard of tactical nuclear weapons and you just explained beautifully
[Amit Varma]: why it's not possible for the benefit of my listeners.
[Amit Varma]: I'll just elaborate on what you mean by tactical and strategic and tell me if I'm doing that
[Amit Varma]: correctly tactical is you have a limited short term objective, like say someone's occupied
[Amit Varma]: a particular area and you want to get them out of there.
[Amit Varma]: And what you do to achieve that limited end is tactical and strategic is a larger objective
[Amit Varma]: of the war as it were a larger long term objective.
[Amit Varma]: And your point is that even if they use or rather the Indian point of view here is that
[Amit Varma]: even if they use a nuclear weapon for what seems to be the limited objective, that army
[Amit Varma]: ko yahan se bhagao, it will have strategic repercussions because it will change the way
[Amit Varma]: not just India but the whole the way the whole world views that particular engagement and
[Amit Varma]: it will just change the paradigm of India Pakistan relations.
[Guest]: Yeah, right.
[Guest]: See the basic distinction, which although there is no clear line, is the magnitude of
[Guest]: the effect of using something of applying force.
[Guest]: Does that magnitude of that affect your long term goals?
[Guest]: That is strategic.
[Guest]: The ones which are actually of a local nature, which will disappear after some time, which
[Guest]: does not may impact so much, although it can have an impact on your long term goal, but
[Guest]: the impact is less and that is actually what is differentiates between the tactical and
[Amit Varma]: strategic.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So what I want to do now is ask you about the different doctrines that different nuclear
[Amit Varma]: nations have, like how have they formulated that but before that, what strikes me as very
[Amit Varma]: interesting is that because we have almost a non existent sample size of nuclear nations
[Amit Varma]: actually getting into conflicts with each other, all of these doctrines and everything
[Amit Varma]: that we understand about the subject is in the realm of theory.
[Amit Varma]: Practically what happens and you use a famous phrase of fog of war in the conversation we
[Amit Varma]: were happening just before we started recording and in practical terms, what will happen in
[Amit Varma]: the fog of war, you know, when war actually begins and one event leads to another is something
[Amit Varma]: that hasn't been tested yet.
[Amit Varma]: And everything therefore is in the realm of theory.
[Guest]: Yeah, that's the problem actually.
[Guest]: And I say this in the book, the problem with nuclear strategy is it cannot answer the question
[Guest]: what happens when deterrence fails.
[Guest]: See all nuclear strategy is based on the fact that it is meant to deter.
[Guest]: That means it is meant to deter the other person from using nuclear weapons, but some
[Guest]: doctrines of other countries and most doctrines of other countries except India and China
[Guest]: believe that nuclear weapons can be threatened to be used against conventional force against
[Guest]: biological and chemical weapons, but it is only India and China, which believes that
[Guest]: we think that nuclear weapons can deter only their kind.
[Guest]: And India also has another option for biological and chemical weapons, where in the doctrine
[Guest]: we say that we retain the option for retaliating with nuclear weapons, if biological and chemical
[Guest]: weapons are used against us, which means we have not committed fully to using it, which
[Guest]: I think is a very wise move, because biological and chemical weapons, although we call them
[Guest]: weapons of mass destruction, are actually of a different kind in the scale and the speed
[Guest]: at which damage can be inflicted.
[Guest]: Nuclear weapons scale and speed are unmatched by biological and chemical weapons.
[Guest]: And you need a lot of biological and a lot of chemical weapons to achieve the same type
[Guest]: of destruction.
[Guest]: So actually speaking, they don't belong to the same basket, although they are mass.
[Guest]: So India very rightly has said that we retain the option and that's how we have actually
[Guest]: get there.
[Guest]: So when you look at all these doctrines, one of the things which distinguishes us in China
[Guest]: is that we have restricted our use of nuclear weapons to a very core deterrence role of
[Guest]: nuclear weapons.
[Guest]: The other nations, United States, Russia, UK, France, have all said that if they are
[Guest]: attacked with conventional weapons, they threaten that they will use nuclear weapons.
[Guest]: And I think so far, if we just take the North Korean example, the fact that North Korea
[Guest]: is just a nuclear state in its infancy, can actually talk up and face the most powerful
[Guest]: nuclear nations in the world is a lesson that you don't have to have many nuclear weapons
[Guest]: to actually scare off the other guy.
[Guest]: Because of the fact that the magnitude, even one nuclear weapon, which visits the United
[Guest]: States of America, one of the cities, would be enough for nuclear weapons for America
[Guest]: to be worried about the fact that this is what can happen to us.
[Guest]: So deterrence does not demand a big scale.
[Guest]: In the Cold War, more than the United States and Russia had more than 60 to 70,000 weapons.
[Guest]: That was a scale because they believe that numbers mattered.
[Guest]: But really numbers do not matter.
[Guest]: And I think that North Korea is now an example which can be quoted that numbers do matter.
[Amit Varma]: So why is it that what's the logic then behind India and China having this different sort
[Amit Varma]: of doctrine where they say that we will use nuclear weapons only if nuclear weapons are
[Amit Varma]: used against us and maybe other WMD as you said?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: See, the basic difference between India, China and the rest is, is we are two countries who
[Guest]: have really not used military force for coercion.
[Guest]: We have not threatened military force for coercion.
[Guest]: We've used it to defend.
[Guest]: Yeah, but basically, we are saying that we are military and we don't want to use nuclear
[Guest]: weapons to coerce others.
[Guest]: China went nuclear because America used the threat of nuclear weapons to coerce China
[Guest]: soon after it became, you know, and I quote those examples when I cover the Chinese doctrine,
[Guest]: where President Truman actually used them and he actually has also threatened them during
[Guest]: the Korean War.
[Guest]: So China is one country which has faced nuclear threats when it didn't have nuclear weapons.
[Guest]: It went nuclear only in 1964.
[Guest]: So it believed and Mao said this very clear that actually nuclear weapons are paper tigers.
[Guest]: You can't threaten anybody with nuclear weapons.
[Guest]: But if you don't have nuclear weapons, others will threaten you with nuclear weapons.
[Guest]: And that is why they went nuclear.
[Guest]: And that is also why India has also gone nuclear, because we were threatened with nuclear weapons
[Guest]: or there was a threat which is developing from China and from Pakistan.
[Guest]: Although China has never threatened us overtly.
[Guest]: But the fact is, we realized that if you don't have nuclear weapons, you will be threatened.
[Guest]: That means you will be coerced.
[Guest]: And therefore was the need for nuclear weapons.
[Guest]: And that is why India and China, Americans and Russians actually at one time, they had
[Guest]: switched from after the Soviet Union broke up, they said they had embraced NFU.
[Guest]: But now they've gone back again, because they say that the conventional power is weak.
[Guest]: So we and China are different because we believe nuclear weapons are only meant for a defensive
[Guest]: purpose.
[Guest]: It is not meant to actually coerce the other and that is where the difference is.
[Amit Varma]: So I have a sort of game theoretical kind of question and forgive me if it's a naive
[Amit Varma]: question because I'm a newbie to the subject.
[Amit Varma]: But if the whole objective of having nuclear weapons of deterrence is to avoid war so that
[Amit Varma]: people are scared to attack you, then isn't it more effective?
[Amit Varma]: If you don't show that restraint, and if you just say that, hey, we can use it anytime,
[Amit Varma]: almost like a game of chicken, where they think that and perhaps game of North Korea
[Amit Varma]: is doing exactly that, you know, he may not really be as reckless and mad as he makes
[Amit Varma]: himself out to be.
[Amit Varma]: But in from a game theoretical point of view, if people think he is like that, then that
[Amit Varma]: will increase the credibility of the deterrence of his nuclear weapons, because I don't think
[Amit Varma]: he's mad enough to just, you know, send a bomb to Seoul anytime.
[Amit Varma]: So from that point of view, it strikes me as sort of counterintuitive that we would
[Amit Varma]: actually impose a restraint on our use of nuclear weapons, instead of saying that, look,
[Amit Varma]: if you attack us all bets off, we'll do anything.
[Amit Varma]: But instead of that, if we just say that we will only use it against other weapons of
[Amit Varma]: mass destruction, then in a sense, that emboldens Pakistan to use conventional weapons and you
[Amit Varma]: know, other means of warfare against us.
[Guest]: Yeah, actually, the situation is called a stability instability paradox.
[Guest]: That when you have nuclear weapons on other both sides, then you have stability at the
[Guest]: higher level, that means you will not go in for a big fight, right?
[Guest]: Because of the fact that the big fight might not turn out to be both of you can get hurt
[Guest]: very badly.
[Guest]: So you have stability there, but you have instability at the lower level.
[Guest]: So because and that's exactly what the Indian condition is, it's typical of what it is.
[Guest]: And there, Pakistan is advantaged, because they can use terror as a tool of foreign policy.
[Guest]: And India finds that is not able to retaliate and stop them from using it.
[Guest]: So that's the instability.
[Guest]: And this we are disadvantaged.
[Guest]: All right.
[Guest]: But let's say that suppose we also had a first use policy, I mean, the policy was first use.
[Guest]: Now, this is a political decision of how you see nuclear weapons.
[Guest]: India does not see nuclear weapons as meant for military use.
[Guest]: It's purely a political weapon for prevent somebody from using it.
[Guest]: And it is politically because one of the things about nuclear weapons is that because of the
[Guest]: sheer destructive power and the magnitude and speed of destruction, anything you say
[Guest]: or threaten the other nuclear weapons goes directly to the decision maker on the other
[Guest]: side.
[Guest]: You know, that's the magnitude of the threat.
[Guest]: So you can influence that mind very well.
[Guest]: You can say you can influence the mind without just issuing a small threat is enough to change
[Guest]: behavior.
[Guest]: So this is what it is.
[Guest]: And also, we are not only India, Pakistan, this thing, we have actually got we're in
[Guest]: a situation where we have got another adversary in China.
[Guest]: So we have a triad here.
[Guest]: So it is from the belief, the basic belief of what nuclear weapons are meant for that
[Guest]: are no first use doctrine has to come into play.
[Guest]: Any other thought is military in character.
[Guest]: It is not political in character.
[Guest]: The politics obviously is the one should guide what is military.
[Guest]: See that is why all military people do not agree with the idea that no first use is a
[Guest]: good thing because if militaries don't want to get hit first, they would like naturally
[Guest]: to hit.
[Guest]: Or at least have that credible thing.
[Guest]: But the problem with nuclear weapons is that first use is not credible because even if
[Guest]: you can be visited and returned by a couple of weapons, it would really you won't use
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: And also there is another complexity here.
[Guest]: Now that complexity comes from the fact that if there is a regional nuclear war, let's
[Guest]: say we have a regional.
[Guest]: Studies now indicate that the whole global it's possible that it impact the globe in
[Guest]: climatically.
[Guest]: And that's going to be of concern to everybody else.
[Guest]: Because of the fact that firstly we are very densely populated in a space was Pakistan
[Guest]: so is India.
[Guest]: We are very combustible in our cities, a lot of energies reside in them.
[Guest]: So the type of smoke and this thing which we are going to throw around the world will
[Guest]: cause climate change, which will affect the entire globe and probably depending upon the
[Guest]: intensity of what has happened, it can cause widespread biological changes, which will
[Guest]: affect your food chain, your water and threaten existence and life itself because of the social
[Guest]: turmoil it's going to create in the rest of the world.
[Guest]: So world now knows that if India and Pakistan fights a nuclear war, it's not going to be
[Guest]: contained to the effects in the subcontinent, the world is going to be affected.
[Guest]: So the any idea who's saying that you know, we're going to use this first has a credibility
[Guest]: problem.
[Guest]: And I think India has been very wise to the fact that we don't see this at all as a military
[Guest]: weapon.
[Guest]: Militaries don't like this idea because militaries don't like to wait to be hit.
[Guest]: And that's why the whole Dettin's theory is based on what you call second strike capability.
[Amit Varma]: So I have a follow up question on this.
[Amit Varma]: Before that, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Unknown]: Okay.
[Unknown]: Welcome to another week on IBM podcast.
[Unknown]: If you're not following us on social media, please do where IBM podcast on Twitter, Facebook
[Unknown]: and Instagram.
[Unknown]: This week on Cyrus says Cyrus talks to restauranteurs Pankaj Shah, Abhishek Hunawar and Sumit Gambir
[Unknown]: of neighborhood hospitality.
[Unknown]: They talk about their past and they talk about their future.
[Unknown]: They talk a lot more about their future and new show that we got launching called the
[Unknown]: Kulabba Cartel.
[Unknown]: Please make sure that you check that out as well.
[Unknown]: In a two episode special on the Pragati podcast, Pavan and Hamsini are joined by author and
[Unknown]: legal expert Rahul Mathan to discuss the Shri Krishna report and India's stress with the
[Unknown]: concept of privacy.
[Unknown]: On Srini 1 this week, we have Vishal Gondal from the Vishal Gondal show.
[Unknown]: He takes us through his journey on Goki.
[Unknown]: And just a quick shout out to all of our listeners along with the Kulabba Cartel.
[Unknown]: We have a whole host of other shows launching this month.
[Unknown]: So stay tuned to the IBM podcast app and make sure that you follow all of our new shows
[Unknown]: as well.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Lieutenant General Prakash Menon about nuclear weapons and the use of
[Amit Varma]: force and how they change the dynamic between nations.
[Amit Varma]: So my question for you, General Menon, then is that if we have decided that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there's no first use doctrine and this is not a military weapon, it's a political weapon
[Amit Varma]: to scare the other guy and we're never actually going to use it.
[Amit Varma]: But then doesn't it become a very weak political weapon if the other guy knows that he India
[Amit Varma]: is never going to use it, so it doesn't matter.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time, since we are not going to retaliate to conventional attacks with
[Amit Varma]: nuclear weapons, doesn't it actually in one way make us weaker because earlier we could
[Amit Varma]: have engaged in unrestrained conventional warfare.
[Amit Varma]: But now we can't even do that because it might escalate.
[Amit Varma]: And everybody knows we're not going to use the nuclear weapons.
[Amit Varma]: How does that affect the dynamic?
[Guest]: No, we are not saying we won't use it.
[Guest]: We are saying that we will use it if you use nuclear weapons, if the adversary uses nuclear
[Guest]: weapons.
[Guest]: So the fact is, we don't want to bring the nuclear weapon into the equation as far as
[Guest]: war is concerned.
[Guest]: We're saying that we will not use it first.
[Guest]: That's the first point.
[Guest]: The second point is that if you, the threat which we face today from both China and Pakistan,
[Guest]: we do not intend to counter that threat through nuclear weapons.
[Guest]: Because we do not believe that nuclear weapons can be used.
[Guest]: That is the fundamental belief.
[Guest]: Because if it is used, and if it is used between nuclear powers, it will not only affect both
[Guest]: those nations, it will affect the entire globe.
[Guest]: And what do Pakistan and China believe?
[Guest]: China has the same belief as us.
[Guest]: They believe that it's a political weapon.
[Guest]: In fact, their nuclear doctrine is quite congruent to us.
[Guest]: In fact, Mao said that nuclear weapons are paper tigers.
[Guest]: It's a famous quote that he made.
[Guest]: And so as far as China is concerned, we are on the same, we do not believe that within
[Guest]: our this thing, we'll bring nuclear weapons with.
[Guest]: But as far as Pakistan is concerned, it's a smaller power.
[Guest]: It sees India as a bigger conventional power.
[Guest]: And it believes that if it wields the threat of nuclear weapons, India will not attack
[Guest]: it conventionally.
[Guest]: My point is, India does not have to attack Pakistan conventionally, because now there
[Guest]: is no reason for doing so, because you can't achieve much with it.
[Guest]: So we must first embrace the idea that going to war with Pakistan cannot achieve anything
[Guest]: much for what you actually want to fight the war.
[Amit Varma]: Why do you want to go to war with Pakistan in any case?
[Guest]: Why can't it achieve anything?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: The problem is like this.
[Guest]: Pakistan, the nature of the state that it is, is a jihadist country.
[Guest]: It's actually controlled by the armed forces, which is in power all the time, whether it
[Guest]: is officially or not.
[Guest]: If you want to actually control Pakistan, or you want this thing, you will have to have
[Guest]: to defeat the Pakistan armed forces.
[Guest]: If you defeat the Pakistani armed forces, then you need to control the land area of
[Guest]: Pakistan.
[Guest]: And it's a jihadist state.
[Guest]: So why would you, and unfortunately for us, if Pakistan implodes, let's say we go to war
[Guest]: with Pakistan and Pakistan armed forces actually are defeated and Pakistan therefore, since
[Guest]: army is in control there, Pakistan will implode.
[Guest]: Let's say the, there will be complete civil disorder.
[Amit Varma]: Sorry for interrupting, but if the army faces an existential threat, then they're very likely
[Guest]: to just use a nuclear weapon anyway, right?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So why would you actually want to do that?
[Guest]: Why would you want to put them in that position?
[Guest]: What are you going to gain?
[Guest]: The point is you have to relate that war as an instrument for what you want to achieve.
[Guest]: Why are you going to war with Pakistan?
[Guest]: If you're going to war with Pakistan to stop Pakistan from using terror as a tool of foreign
[Guest]: policy, then defeating the Pakistani armed forces will make Pakistan implode.
[Guest]: Jihadis probably might take over and the civilian population, we can go nowhere else because
[Guest]: geography doesn't allow them.
[Guest]: They will come here.
[Guest]: We won't be able to stop them at the borders.
[Guest]: And that probably, if you look at India's own fault line, it'll obviously deepen that
[Guest]: fault line and we could be in serious trouble ourselves.
[Guest]: So we have a paradox here that we call it an adversary.
[Guest]: If you go to war with them, defeat them, then you might finally, you yourself will be in
[Guest]: trouble because of that defeat.
[Guest]: It's a paradox.
[Guest]: So how do you actually now deal with this state?
[Guest]: Through force.
[Guest]: So is force the correct way to deal with it?
[Guest]: Because if you're going to war, what is your purpose?
[Guest]: And that purpose actually in this case is self-defeating.
[Guest]: If you use force, and that's something which Indian political leaders need to realize.
[Amit Varma]: And would it be correct to say that given the kind of terror operations that are carried
[Amit Varma]: out from Pakistan against us constantly, you know, for the last couple of decades, at least
[Amit Varma]: that whatever we feel about it, they are already at a state of war against us.
[Amit Varma]: So my two questions would be that, does our having nuclear weapons make a difference to
[Amit Varma]: how we tackle this?
[Amit Varma]: And the second one would be how should we tackle this given the way things are?
[Guest]: Yeah, let's put it this way.
[Guest]: If we didn't have nuclear weapons, I'm sure by now we would have gone to war with Pakistan,
[Guest]: let's say in 2008 and all those things.
[Guest]: So probably, although it cannot be directly connected, but you must say that the just
[Guest]: the emotional fuel in India about these terror attacks would have forced the politicians
[Guest]: hand to actually go to war, but it hasn't happened.
[Guest]: One of the reasons probably could be is that there's nuclear weapons in play here.
[Guest]: But I think the main issue here is if terror is what Pakistan is going to use and terror
[Guest]: is a means it's actually not something which you can say that you can stop them from using
[Guest]: it because that's the means that a weak nation will use the means at its disposal.
[Guest]: And Pakistan's strategy is about, you know, wounding India with a thousand cuts.
[Guest]: And these are the thousand cuts.
[Guest]: Now, if you look at India in the larger context, we look at ourselves, what where are we now?
[Guest]: We are in the process of development.
[Guest]: Our main focus is not Pakistan.
[Guest]: Our main focus is our own economic and social development.
[Guest]: If that is the focus, then our strategy should be not get involved with the jihadist state
[Guest]: and try to reform it because we cannot.
[Guest]: Our strategy should be to contain it in such a manner that it does not affect our main
[Guest]: focus, which is economic and social development.
[Guest]: So if we think that if we fall into the trap which Pakistan is laying out for us, then
[Guest]: come and get enmeshed with them and start a ding dong battle or fight, then I think
[Guest]: in strategic terms, it is not prudent.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a negative sum game where we have more to lose.
[Guest]: Yes, of course.
[Guest]: And that is exactly what Pakistan wants in the sense that, remember, Pakistan's army's
[Guest]: main strength comes from actually creating an Indian threat.
[Guest]: If that Indian threat is what keeps the rest of support, the support to Pakistani army
[Guest]: in that polity.
[Guest]: So for them to create the Indian threat is the strengthening.
[Guest]: We should be wary of when we deal with Pakistan with force, that this is what Pakistan's strategy
[Guest]: and gameplay is.
[Guest]: If we know this is the gameplay, then when we are hit, and I suggest that in my book,
[Guest]: it is not about hitting back because we want to stop them from doing what they want to
[Guest]: do.
[Guest]: It is about retribution.
[Guest]: It will have an impact, but we know that impact is temporary.
[Guest]: But it also got another major impact.
[Guest]: It is to sort of assuage the hurt feelings of India's population itself, who seeks revenge
[Guest]: because of an act of terror.
[Guest]: No politician can possibly say that we won't do anything.
[Guest]: No, no, we must.
[Guest]: They will have to be seen as doing something.
[Guest]: So now the use of force is transformed into this ability to strike back, not only to create,
[Guest]: it will only create a tactical effect in Pakistan.
[Guest]: But the effect here would actually be what matters politically, which means we have done
[Amit Varma]: something to them.
[Amit Varma]: So in a sense, a surgical strike against Pakistan might have a limited tactical impact, but
[Amit Varma]: a greater strategic impact within the Indian discourse, because in terms of optics and
[Amit Varma]: assuaging the weighing masses, it sort of calms down the lust for war in a sense.
[Guest]: Yes, it is.
[Guest]: Unfortunately, that's the case.
[Guest]: So now, how does the politician therefore control the cycle of revenge?
[Guest]: So one of the things I say in my book is, we should now, and as the militaries are organized
[Guest]: at the moment, organized for the big fight, you know, big fights cannot take place.
[Guest]: So firstly, they have to be restructured, reengineered, and we should have the capability
[Guest]: to strike without posturing.
[Guest]: This is the operational shift, which I talk about in my book, that we need to do this.
[Guest]: We are only meant to, the thing that if anything happens, we must immediately strike back.
[Guest]: And we hope that with the strike back, the tactical equilibrium is reestablished.
[Guest]: So you go back to normal.
[Guest]: So this will have the minimum disturbance on what we should concentrate on, which is
[Guest]: economic and social development.
[Guest]: So that's just one of the things which I say.
[Guest]: But the danger here is how do you play back this retributive act which you have done and
[Guest]: connect it to your domestic politics.
[Guest]: The temptation for a government in power is to use it for electoral purposes.
[Guest]: And that has got potential for taking things out of control.
[Guest]: Because if you are going to benefit from it electorally, then you would like to play it
[Guest]: up in such a manner that the other side would want to actually, what do you call, retaliate
[Guest]: in kind.
[Guest]: So there is this danger here.
[Guest]: And what we see of the surgical strikes in the videos which is now coming after, is this
[Guest]: being played out?
[Guest]: I mean, the fact is that now it's about how do we get the audience, Indian audience, in
[Guest]: support and tell them that, you know, and one of the things is there is a lot of emotional
[Guest]: fuel here, which is in support of the fact that you are acting tough against the Pakistanis.
[Guest]: Because now in the Indian democratic discourse, any action taken against this great enemy
[Guest]: of ours has got a lot of power and strengthens the government.
[Guest]: So here we are, we are in a situation where we are nuclear powers, there is this seduction
[Guest]: of using force for electoral purposes.
[Amit Varma]: And that's dangerous.
[Amit Varma]: I find this incredibly alarming because just the thought of a politician sitting in an
[Amit Varma]: air-conditioned cabin in New Delhi, looking at his popularity numbers and saying, okay,
[Amit Varma]: what can I do that will be good optics and using army action as a means to achieve popularity
[Amit Varma]: among the masses who might be wanting strong action from him is very alarming because the
[Amit Varma]: question then comes is that, where does he draw the line?
[Amit Varma]: And if there is a disconnect in his mind between the actual consequences of war, and you know,
[Amit Varma]: what he's using it for, that's incredibly scary.
[Amit Varma]: Where does it stop?
[Guest]: Yeah, I know that's the problem, actually.
[Guest]: So fundamentally, now it's a question of how do you strike a balance between national interests
[Guest]: and party interests?
[Guest]: Can the leadership actually rise above his party interests and look at national interests?
[Guest]: And that's actually depends upon the type of leadership that we have.
[Guest]: I'm sure in course of time, we'll find this constantly being played out.
[Guest]: And it will be interesting to see as to how leadership will learn the lessons.
[Guest]: The question is, they might start a process which they may not be able to control.
[Guest]: And that's dangerous.
[Guest]: So it is better not to start riding the tiger or the horse because you won't know where
[Guest]: to get off.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I find your presumption that such a balance can be struck between political
[Amit Varma]: interest and national interest to be very idealistic because I don't think such a balance
[Amit Varma]: can exist.
[Amit Varma]: The immediate incentives of a Prime Minister will always be to ensure re-election.
[Amit Varma]: That's pretty much the bottom line with any politician.
[Amit Varma]: So then the question then comes in, that are our institutions strong enough to withstand
[Amit Varma]: political pressures?
[Amit Varma]: Like one of the beautiful things about one of the things which has worked about this
[Amit Varma]: great Indian experiment is that our army has been sort of kept apart from politics and
[Amit Varma]: has sort of maintained its distance and its autonomy to a certain extent as compared to
[Amit Varma]: Pakistan where the army kind of runs the show and is the big, big political force there.
[Amit Varma]: Do you see that distance under threat?
[Guest]: See, I think the greater danger lies in the fact that such decisions are made by a small
[Guest]: oligarchy in the PMO instead of passing it through institutions which have been established.
[Guest]: We should look at it holistically like the National Security Council, which will look
[Guest]: at the whole issue of whether what should we do.
[Guest]: It is established primarily for this purpose.
[Guest]: If you look at K Subramanian, who actually written about it, and he said there were two
[Guest]: gives two prime examples of why National Security Council was required.
[Guest]: It is to prevent individuals or a small oligarchy from making decisions and taking nations down
[Guest]: a path which actually is not being examined fully.
[Guest]: And he quotes Rajiv Gandhi's support of the LTT, which was done decision taken by a small
[Guest]: group of people.
[Guest]: And he also quotes Indira Gandhi's support of Bindramwale.
[Guest]: You know, all these two major decisions, if you look at it retrospectively, they were
[Guest]: decisions which if it was examined carefully, for its repercussions would never have been
[Guest]: taken.
[Guest]: So the danger for us is the political leadership not using the institutions which have now
[Guest]: been put in place.
[Guest]: And after all, these institutions have been put in place by the Vajpayee government.
[Guest]: But when you are in power, you can always bypass these institutions.
[Guest]: And actually, it's not only our country, but happens all over the world.
[Guest]: If you look at the Americans also, and the decisions taken there, they're not able to
[Guest]: get something done the way they want to do it.
[Guest]: They just bypass the institution which is supposed to examine it.
[Guest]: So we can be no different, but there is a danger lurking there.
[Amit Varma]: So I'd like to take the subject back to your book, because I think I've done a slide this
[Amit Varma]: service by going off in with all these general questions and all these general directions.
[Amit Varma]: Part of your book also while examining your thesis about the possible use of conventional
[Amit Varma]: forces during nuclear weapons, looks at your lessons from Kargil, your lessons from Parakram,
[Amit Varma]: where you were a brigade commander, and you said that, you know, had war broken out, that
[Amit Varma]: would have disproved your thesis and as it happens, that didn't happen.
[Amit Varma]: So can you tell me a little bit about these sort of these seminal moments where we discovered
[Amit Varma]: and you could, you know, in the context of your thesis, examine all of these developments?
[Guest]: Yeah, actually, starting with Kargil.
[Guest]: Although my research into Kargil indicates to me that Pakistan did not have nuclear weapons,
[Guest]: operational nuclear weapons, which Musharraf himself has admitted in his book, but the
[Guest]: Indians I think would have presumed that they have some sort of nuclear capability.
[Guest]: But it was never discussed in the cabinet.
[Guest]: The only discussion took place between General Malik and General Malik writes in his book
[Guest]: between him and Brijesh Mishra, which is outside the cabinet.
[Guest]: I mean, just in exchange, a discussion between them about the impact of nuclear weapons,
[Guest]: but there's nothing serious.
[Guest]: But yet the cabinet imposes a restriction on the armed forces not to cross the L.C.
[Guest]: I think the more reason for that would have been that India's sensitivity to international
[Guest]: support for the fight against Pakistan.
[Guest]: I think that would have been the major, which is weighed on that decision.
[Guest]: And I may not be nuclear weapons, although we can never be sure of that.
[Guest]: So Kargil actually is now being quoted as one of the successors of limited war.
[Guest]: I would agree because in the sense it also tells us that it is a war which is limited
[Guest]: in geographic space, in quantum of force which was used and also limited in its objective,
[Guest]: which was just to get the Pakistanis out from the area we occupied.
[Guest]: This sort of war is possible.
[Guest]: And that's the type, so border skirmishes, limited geographic wars are what we are going
[Guest]: to see as the forms of war as far as Pakistan are concerned.
[Guest]: Primarily because there are nuclear weapons in play.
[Guest]: So if this is a type of war, then we must also restructure ourselves to fight the type
[Guest]: of war which we're likely to fight.
[Guest]: But you know, the problem is that we really do not know and the armies cannot be sure
[Guest]: as to how a war can start and where it can reach.
[Guest]: It has to be prepared for the whole hog, because if it is not prepared for the higher level,
[Guest]: then you might be at a disadvantage.
[Guest]: So conventional force doesn't go away.
[Guest]: Conventional force retains its ability to actually have deterrent power.
[Guest]: That is why having an aircraft carrier, having a fighter aircraft, they've all got tremendous
[Guest]: optical power, the ability to deter.
[Guest]: But whether we can use them against an enemy and fight a big war is what is questionable.
[Guest]: So the paradox is you need all these big things, but you may not be able to use them the way
[Guest]: that they're meant to be used.
[Guest]: So at the level of deterrence, there is this need for these sort of...
[Amit Varma]: You need them to cast a shadow in the enemy's mind, but you're never actually...
[Guest]: So they're useful for deterrence, but questionable whether we can use them.
[Amit Varma]: And that's the paradox.
[Amit Varma]: And what about Parakram?
[Amit Varma]: Because you were in a sense almost personally involved there.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, before this podcast started and we were chatting in your cabin, you told
[Amit Varma]: me about how it was almost a big complicated situation for you because you felt that if
[Amit Varma]: war breaks out, my thesis will be disproved.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time, you're preparing for that war and preparing to win it.
[Guest]: Yeah, you see, I was commanding the Haji Pir Brigade and that brigade is actually what
[Guest]: is called a core reserve brigade, which means it is the offensive element, one of the offensive
[Guest]: elements of the core.
[Guest]: So I have this big plethora of offensive plans, which I make, which is fundamentally about
[Guest]: capturing territory.
[Guest]: And so I'm making all these plans and I'm rehearsing them and I'm briefing people and
[Guest]: briefing this thing is what I'm going to do.
[Guest]: But in my heart, I have this thesis which says that this sort of war should not actually
[Guest]: be there.
[Guest]: So there is a contradiction between my what I do officially and what it is.
[Guest]: And then finally, I'm proved right because war never takes place because it could not
[Guest]: have taken place according to my thesis.
[Guest]: So my thesis survives Parakram.
[Guest]: And Parakram, therefore, is a good example.
[Guest]: And we have learned from it.
[Guest]: But what did we learn?
[Guest]: Now we learned the lesson was the army took away was that, you know, one of the reasons
[Guest]: why Parakram didn't take place because we were slow to mobilize.
[Guest]: We had this very large formations, which we call a strike corps, which took a long time
[Guest]: to get to the frontier, by which time actually the Pakistanis.
[Guest]: So that is why was born what is called the Cold Start Doctrine.
[Guest]: The Cold Start Doctrine believes that we can strike before he gets prepared.
[Guest]: Basically that's the concept.
[Guest]: This is another military friction, which can actually it's good to try and scare the other
[Guest]: through Cold Start because Cold Start means that you have to move formations very close
[Guest]: to the western border.
[Guest]: And then you have to apply them very speedily before that guy can actually react.
[Guest]: But in the Indo-Pak context, it's difficult to do that because when you move from the
[Guest]: hinterland, all these formations, then Pakistan also can also move them because this you have
[Guest]: to do in peace because you relocate them.
[Guest]: And once you relocate them, then nothing stopping from him relocating you.
[Guest]: So what happened after Cold Start has been in motion for some time now is that both of
[Guest]: us have relocated some formations and he has also done the same.
[Guest]: So we are now back to square one and more than anything else, it is a doctrine which
[Guest]: Pakistan has run with by saying that look at the Indians, they've got this Cold Start
[Guest]: Doctrine.
[Guest]: That is why we're saying that they pose a serious threat to us.
[Guest]: So they've used that threat to increase their own power within the domestic polity and also
[Guest]: tell the international community, see how the Indians are threatening us and focusing
[Guest]: attention on the Indo-Pak border, which they want to paint as the most dangerous flashpoint
[Guest]: in the world because that suits their interests.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, through this book, it's very interesting to see, you know, your thinking
[Amit Varma]: on these subjects, but how is the thinking of the Indian Army changed over all of this?
[Amit Varma]: Because as you pointed out, almost no one was on the side you're on when all this began.
[Amit Varma]: How has that changed over the years, not just with, you know, new theoretical thinking on
[Amit Varma]: it such as yours, but also the experience of having gone through Kargil, Parakram, you
[Amit Varma]: know, the aftermath of the Mumbai attacks?
[Guest]: The point I make in my book is, the Army has no other choice but try to see as to how they
[Guest]: can make themselves relevant in this situation.
[Guest]: I do not see any major restructuring which the armed forces has done to make them relevant,
[Guest]: except for this Cold Start doctrine, which I think is military fiction.
[Guest]: So the Army has been trying to discover operational virtuosity, which is the word I use, to see
[Guest]: as to how we can overcome this problem.
[Guest]: But my point is that such operational virtuosity cannot exist in the structural situation India
[Guest]: finds itself.
[Guest]: Between the fact that this is what the geography is, the nuclear weapons are there, that structural
[Guest]: situation is not redeemable through operational virtuosity.
[Guest]: You have no choice.
[Guest]: You have to make the political leaders understand what force is meant for, what it's possible
[Guest]: for them to do, and you need a dialogue to make that happen.
[Guest]: But in the Indian instance, that dialogue is not there.
[Guest]: That dialogue is spasmodic if it ever exists.
[Guest]: So the politicians, when it comes to it, will probably be episodic to a particular situation,
[Guest]: then forget about it because they move on to many other things.
[Guest]: So we suffer now from a systemic problem that we have yet to crystallize.
[Guest]: What do we need the armed forces for?
[Guest]: What is the political objectives we need to reach?
[Guest]: That is why we don't have a national strategy, neither do we have a military strategy, because
[Guest]: all this has to come from the fact that what does India want to do?
[Guest]: What sort of military power do we want?
[Guest]: The meta question, how do we balance our continental and maritime power?
[Guest]: Because it is obvious to us that as far as international politics is concerned, maritime
[Guest]: power will be the ones which we can make a difference.
[Guest]: Continental power is where we can't project power because we are locked here with Pakistan
[Guest]: and nuclear power, with China and the mountains and so on.
[Guest]: So we have to make this decision about how do we shape the military instrument.
[Guest]: India, because of its institutional inadequacies, have not been able to make these decisions.
[Guest]: And therefore we continue to actually do it in parts.
[Amit Varma]: And would it then be correct to say that because we are a nuclear power facing other nuclear
[Amit Varma]: powers like Pakistan and China, especially Pakistan, we are stuck between a rock and
[Amit Varma]: a hard place.
[Amit Varma]: On the one hand, we have nuclear weapons, but everybody knows that our whole objective
[Amit Varma]: is not to use them and therefore we are going to be very restrained.
[Amit Varma]: And on the other hand, because we have those nuclear weapons, we cannot use conventional
[Amit Varma]: forces beyond a certain threshold, as you point out, which is why Parakram didn't happen
[Amit Varma]: and Kargil is pretty much an exemplar of the kind of force that can be used, but no more
[Amit Varma]: than that.
[Amit Varma]: It then strikes me as a dilemma that, like you said, what is the role of the military?
[Guest]: Yeah, you're right.
[Guest]: You're right.
[Guest]: So the challenge for the military is, the fact is that force does not going to go away.
[Guest]: It has to change its forms to suit the situation.
[Guest]: Today, that force, which we call the kinetic force, is now sort of morphed itself into
[Guest]: many other ways.
[Guest]: And cyber actually is a good example of what is possible.
[Guest]: Therefore, India has to identify those capacities and therefore use those capacities for the
[Guest]: ability to either destroy, hurt or cause pain, which can be used and identify the types of
[Guest]: war for which it should be prepared to fight.
[Guest]: I'm afraid that the armed forces continue to be focused on what is called the Napoleonic
[Guest]: era of the decisive battle, where you bring the armed forces of the others to a decisive
[Guest]: battle and beat them conclusively.
[Guest]: We have to get out of that mindset and look to the present, the contemporary era, to how
[Guest]: do we now identify the types of war we must be ready to fight.
[Guest]: So you have types of war and at the same time, how do we actually manage the issue of deterrence
[Guest]: where you need optical power, which is what China does very well, where you need these
[Guest]: big guys, you can't say that you don't need aircraft carriers or so on.
[Guest]: They all have their uses.
[Guest]: So you need both.
[Guest]: The question is, how do you mesh these two and make it into a coherent strategy, which
[Guest]: must be a military strategy, not an army, air force or a naval strategy.
[Guest]: That is what we have.
[Guest]: Unfortunately, our structures as we are now, we don't have a CDS and you know, the state
[Guest]: in which the MOD is, none of these things are possible.
[Guest]: So we continue to function in silos.
[Guest]: And that I think is a great bane because strategy requires the understanding of the nature of
[Guest]: the whole as Clausewitz would have put it.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: It's been a fascinating discussion.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm going to end with asking you two questions that I ask all my guests on the subject of
[Amit Varma]: expertise.
[Amit Varma]: What makes you hopeful and what makes you despair about the changing nature of war in
[Guest]: this nuclear age?
[Guest]: Hopeful that we will keep our ambitions in check, because there is a danger that we might
[Guest]: cross the line which we do not want and get hurt more than what we actually that danger
[Guest]: that the very fact that uncertainty will keep ambitions in check.
[Guest]: So force will not be used the way it has been used through centuries, which is when we disagree,
[Guest]: then I take it forcefully from you.
[Guest]: You know, that's one of the things which makes me hopeful.
[Guest]: But the larger issue now is, if you look at the world today, and if you see the confrontation
[Guest]: building up with global geopolitics and even Asian geopolitics, the danger of a clash between
[Guest]: the big guys is increasing.
[Guest]: Both of them are very cognizant of the fact that in the previous era, when these sort
[Guest]: of things took place, you could go to war and they would be you would arrive finally,
[Guest]: however painfully at some sort of an equilibrium, which that war would bring about.
[Guest]: But the now the problem is that you can't go to war in that manner.
[Guest]: So nations have been going to war through proxies.
[Guest]: And that's been the way it's done.
[Guest]: But the danger is that today, the pace at which wars are going to be conducted, the
[Guest]: sheer speed at which you're going to exchange energy would would actually enmesh the military
[Guest]: so fast that it can go easily out of political control, that the whole grammar of war will
[Guest]: actually drive the momentum of war, and it will lose political control.
[Guest]: And when war loses political control and is overtaken by military logic, then we are in
[Guest]: danger.
[Amit Varma]: So that is my despair.
[Amit Varma]: With that incredibly horrifying and scary thought, let me thank you so much, General
[Guest]: Menon for coming on the show.
[Guest]: Thank you very much.
[Guest]: It's been a great pleasure.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you, Lieutenant.
[Unknown]: Look, up in the internet!
[Unknown]: It's a meme!
[Unknown]: No, it's a cat video!
[Unknown]: No, it's the Geek Fruit Podcast!
[Unknown]: That's right, we interrupt this riveting broadcast to tell you about our show The Geek Fruit
[Unknown]: Podcast, where Pajus, Dinkar, and I, Chishnu talk about everything in pop culture including
[Unknown]: DC, Marvel, Star Wars, Netflix and everything in between.
[Unknown]: You know how your friends hate it when you ramble about some nerdy crap
[Unknown]: and you just want somebody to listen to you?
[Unknown]: Well, sorry, there's nothing we can do about that,
[Unknown]: but come listen to us ramble and it'll almost be like the real thing.
[Unknown]: Kind of.
[Unknown]: Listen to new episodes of the Geekfruit Podcast every Monday
[Unknown]: and the Geekfruit Bulletin every Thursday
[Unknown]: on iTunes, Google Podcasts, the IBM app, or wherever you listen to podcasts.
[Unknown]: Happy listening, you nerds.
[Unknown]: Did I just catch you on your way to work?
[Unknown]: Or did you end up pulling an all-nighter?
[Unknown]: Let me guess, you have a packed schedule for the day, the week,
[Unknown]: and probably the month and the year.
[Unknown]: That's a lot for your mind to handle, don't you think?
[Unknown]: This buzzing chaos also brings tons of negative thoughts, am I right?
[Unknown]: Try spinning that bottle in a positive direction with me, Chetan.
[Unknown]: On the Positively Unlimited podcast, every Monday on IBM Podcasts.
[Unknown]: It's time to change your life one alphabet at a time.